# Git Happy Path as a Solo Dev

### Git Daily Workflow as a Solo Dev

Let's talk briefly about your average usage of git under the assumption that you're working alone on a project/codebase.
You'll open up a file or files, make changes, create directories, and so on to progress your codebase.
Then you'll need to commit these changes.
I would suggest commiting to the local repo every few minutes of work, or after ever attempt to solve the current bug.
This gives you effectively snapshots of every point that the code was modified into as you worked to solve the problem at hand.
It's similar to pressing ctrl + s as a reflective habit in Microsoft Word while you're working on a term paper, because you never know when your laptop's battery will die.
This is done with the 'git add' and 'git commit' commands like so:

```bash
	git add -A
	git commit -m "some message"
```

You can script these actions with a default message if you like or set an alias in your ~/.bashrc like this:

```bash
	alias save="git add -A; git commit -m \"saving process\""
```

Now every milestone, or every hour or so, you should be pushing to your remote repo with 'git push':

```bash
	git push
```

Now as a solo dev working on this project, you don't have to worry about other people's changes effecting you.
However as a member of a team, you'll need to think through things a bit differently.


### Git Daily Worflow as a member of a team

Teamwork makes the dreams work.
Its important to always default to the operational expectations of the team that you're working on and whatever standards they have established.
This goes for normal work, but doublely so for working in git repos.
However, I'll try to walk you through an average team-based mindset.

Whenever you get a task or a feature set to work on, update your remote.

```bash
	git pull
```

Then make a new branch.
This is called a feature branch.

```bash
	git checkout -b new_feature
```

Be aware that some organizations don't use feature branches, and that's ok.
Just because a feature of a tool is available doesn't mean that you should/have to use it.
However, if you are allowed to use feature branches, name the new branch something unique but descriptive.
Good luck!
Naming is one of the hardest things in computer science.

Now that you have a feature branch, you can operate much like a solo dev would, because this branch currently only exists on your machine, and not one else knows about it or can acces it until you push that branch to the remote server.
You will want to push it to the remote server periodically to safeguard from your computer being the only place in the world that your changes exists.

Once you're ready to merge your feature branch to another branch, you'll need to checkout the branch you wish to merge your feature into.
For this example, I'm going to be merging into a branch called trunk.
After checking back out the other branch, you'll need to update it by getting all of the available changes from the remote server.
This is done with 'git pull'.
Finally you'll merge the 2 branches together with 'git merge'.

```bash
	git checkout trunk
	git pull
	git merge new_feature
```

Now keep in mind, that the git pull can fail as there can be local changes to your version of the trunk branch that conflict with the latest commit of the trunk branch on the remote server.
Likewise, you can have a similar conflict when merging your feature branch into trunk.
Also be aware that this merge doesn't remove or effect the feature branch in any way.
It simply applies the diffs generated by your commits and the history of those commits to the change log that the trunk branch keeps of the history of changes to the trunk branch.


### Alternatives

Let's say for argument's sake, that you're working on a team that doesn't do feature branches, and only has one branch per git repository.
What do you do?
Well, in that case, you probably won't be making as many commits, but you'll need to pull more often.
You're normal workflow may work like this instead:

```bash
	git add -A
	git commit -m "some meaningful message"
	git pull
```

Now this is nearly identical to before, but notice the addition of 'git pull' with each commit.
This is to safeguard your changes and git history from getting too far away from the remote server, and to make sure that any changes your attempting to make on the codebase isn't stepping on other work being done.
Remember remote git repos are by default a many to one relationship with all of the developers you have working on the project.
Each one of those developers can and will being making changes of their own to the codebase and pushing those changes up to the remote server as it is acting as the default source of truth.




